Add README and documentation files, re-implement synchronous version of the accountability algorithm based on previous commits, add benchmark scripts to run experiments (#16)
mikanikos/Fork-Accountability: docs/1-tendermint-overview.md

Tendermint is notable for its simplicity and performance and is currently one of the most mature and widely used implementations of BFT consensus.

### Properties 

The Tendermint consensus algorithm guarantees the following properties, with respect to a consensus instance:

- **Agreement**: No two correct processes decide on different values

- **Validity**: A value decided is a valid value, with respect to the specifications of validity of a message

- **Termination**: All correct processes eventually decide

- **Integrity**: No correct process decides more than once in a single height 

In order to ensure all these properties, the Tendermint consensus algorithm assumes a correct majority of processes such that less than one third of processes are faulty (*f*):
 
    n > 3f
 
When a process *p* is faulty, *p* can behave in an arbitrary way and we have no assumptions or guarantees regarding its actions.
 
In order to simplify the whole discussion, we assume the following from now on:
 
    n = 3f + 1

### Overview

> The consensus algorithm proceeds in rounds: in each round there is a validator that proposes a value (proposer) and all the validators then vote during the round on whether to accept the proposed value or move on to the next round (proposers are chosen according to their voting power).

Reviewer: I wouldn't introduce the voting power since we do not talk about it before. 
We need to be careful here.

Author: Ok I'll remove it

 
We can summarize the execution in a round in **two voting steps**: PREVOTE and PRECOMMIT steps. A vote can be for a particular value or for *nil* (null value).

A correct process decides on a value *v* in a round *r* upon receiving a proposal and *2f + 1* quorum of PRECOMMIT messages for *v* in a round *r*. 
A correct process sends a PRECOMMIT message for a value *v* in a round *r* upon receiving a proposal and *2f + 1* quorum of PREVOTE messages for *v* in a round *r*.

Validators wait some time before sending a PREVOTE for *nil* if they do not receive a valid proposal after a certain time (*proposalTimeout*) and they send a PRECOMMIT message for *nil* if they do not receive *2f + 1* matching PREVOTE messages for a value after a certain time (*prevoteTimeout*).
If processes do not receive *2f + 1* matching PRECOMMIT messages for a value after a certain time (*precommitTimeout*), they move to the next round.

After a decision has been made, processes continue to agree on other values on another consensus instance (*height*) and they repeat the process described above in order to agree on different transactions.

> ### Rules

Reviewer: Maybe "Correct behaviour"?

Author: Yes, "Correct behavior" would be good as well. I named this sub-section "Rules" because I wanted to give a simple overview of the constraints used to guarantee the 4 properties. But I agree that correct behavior gives a better idea

    Since the number of faulty processes is at most *f*, at least *f + 1* correct processes have locked value *v'* by round *r' > r* and these processes must have received at least 2f + 1 PREVOTE messages for value v' by round r'.
    
    From the fact that the intersection of *2f + 1* processes has at least one correct process, at least one correct process that locked value *v* in round *r* also sent a PREVOTE message for value *v'* in a later round *r' > r*. 
    Since this is impossible, it can only be that *v = v'*.

Since these are the only two possible cases, the above reasoning proves that the agreement property is satisfied.

## Conclusive remarks

The Tendermint consensus protocol is a simple and efficient algorithm that guarantees the four properties mentioned above. These guarantees are valid as long as faulty processes are at most one third of the total number of validators in the system.

However, when this assumption is not valid anymore, processes can decide on different values in the same consensus instance and the blockchain can potentially diverge into two potential decision paths, making the entire protocol break.

> Although it is not possible to provide all the four properties in this scenario, it can be desirable having some other "safety" guarantees that allow the system to self-recover from the possible fault. 

Reviewer: Maybe "additional" instead of "some other"

Author: Fixed

# Tendermint protocol overview

We are going to present a very short overview of the [Tendermint](https://github.com/tendermint) consensus algorithm and the main aspects that are necessary in order to understand the fork accountability algorithm. 

> Please note that this is note an exhaustive and formal description, we invite the reader to check out the [Tendermint documentation](https://docs.tendermint.com/master/) and the [official paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.04938) about the consensus algorithm.   

Reviewer: typo ("not" instead of "note")

Author: Fixed

## Consensus algorithm

Tendermint is a partially synchronous BFT consensus protocol. The protocol requires a fixed set of validators that attempt to come to consensus on one value or, more precisely, on a block (a block is a list of transactions) using gossip-based communication. The consensus algorithm proceeds in rounds: in each round there's a validator that proposes a value (proposer) and all the validators then vote during the round on whether to accept the proposed value or move on to the next round (proposers are chosen according to their voting power).

As most of the consensus algorithms, the Tendermint consensus algorithm assumes a correct majority of processes: less than 1/3 of processes are faulty (*f*), therefore the total number of processes *n* is strictly greater than *3f* (*n > 3f*). 

During a round, processes can exchange different messages and we can summarize the execution in two voting steps: Prevote and Precommit steps. A vote can be for a particular value or for a null value.

> A correct process decides on a value *v* upon receiving a proposal and *2f + 1* Precommit messages for *v* in a round *r*. A correct process sends a Precommit message for a value *v* upon receiving a proposal and *2f + 1* Prevote messages for *v* in a round *r*.

Reviewer: I would add "A correct process decides on a value V IN ROUND R ...". Added "in round R".

Reviewer: Same for sending of a Precommit message.

Reviewer: Also, you haven't mentioned that n = 3f + 1 so far. Hence, quorum of 2f + 1 should be avoided. Instead, either introduce that n = 3f + 1 and use 2f + 1 quorum size or use quorum size of (n + f + 1) /2.

Author: Fixed and moved the n = 3f + 1 before.

Validators wait some time before sending a Prevote with a null value if they don't receive a valid proposal after a certain time and they send a Precommit message with a null value if they don't receive *2f + 1* Prevote messages for a value.
If a correct process receives more than 2/3 Precommit messages for a null value in the same round, it moves to the next round.

After a decision has been made, processes continue to agree on other values on another height (consensus instance) and they repeat the process described above in order to agree on different transactions.

In order to ensure that processes will eventually come to a decision, there are some constraints that are applied. These rules are used to prevent any malicious attempt to cause more than one block to be committed at a given height. 

> When a validator sends a Precommit for a value *v* at round *r*, we say it is *locked* on *v*. Validators can propose and send Prevote messages for a value they have locked and they can only change the locked value if they receive a more recent proposal with a quorum of Prevote messages. 

Reviewer: Maybe put "validator" instead of "it" in the first sentence. Maybe someone won't understand who "it" is.

Author: Fixed

These conditions ensure both the safety and liveness properties of the consensus algorithm because a validator cannot send a Precommit message without sufficient evidence and cannot send a Precommit message for a different value at the same time.

Tendermint is notable for its simplicity and performance and is currently one of the best consensus algorithm used in production.

## Properties of consensus 

The Tendermint consensus algorithm guarantees the following properties:

- **Agreement**: No two correct processes decide on different values

> - **Validity**: A value decided is a valid value, respect to the specifications of validity of a message

Reviewer: Typo: "with respect to the ...".

Author: Fixed

- **Termination**: All correct processes eventually decide

- **Integrity**: No correct process decides more than once in a single height 

We limit the discussion to the agreement property only because its proof can be useful to better understand the fork accountability problem. 
We invite interested readers to read the official paper for a more formal, complete and rigorous proof of all the properties listed above.

## Agreement property

> In this section we'll give a simple proof of the agreement property for the Tendermint algorithm and show why the majority assumption is important for ensuring this property.

Reviewer: I would avoid using contractions in order to look more formal.

Reviewer: What is majority assumption? Be more precise here because someone may not know what you mean here.

Author: I think I removed all the contractions from all the documentation files. Majority assumption better explained.

The key idea behind the proof of the agreement property is that any two sets of *2f + 1* processes have at least one correct process in common respect to the Tendermint context.

We know that Tendermint assumes that *n > 3f*, for simplicity we can simplify it such that:
 
    n = 3f + 1

We have two sets of *2f + 1* processes, their sum can be written as:
 
    2(2f + 1) = 4f + 2 = 3f + 1 + f + 1 = n + f + 1
     

> That means that the intersection of these two sets contain at least *f + 1* processes, therefore at least one correct process.  

Reviewer: Typo: "contains"

Author: Fixed

> Given this result, it's quite easy to understand that, if there are at most *f* faulty processes, it's not possible to violate the agreement property in the Tendermint consensus algorithm, as we'll show in the next section.

Reviewer: Contractions. I will not add any more comments regarding that, but I think we should remove them throughout the entire document.

Author: I agree contractions do not sound formal at all and now they are (hopefully) not present anymore. However, I didn't think about making a formal discussion while writing the documentation (for example, rhetorical questions are used and they are not formal). I just wanted to explain the problem and its context using simple words and common language in order to make other readers who don't know the subject understand the project. If we want to use a different language (not a problem for me), I might need to change the style of all documents but I'm not sure this is what we wanted. Maybe we can discuss this tomorrow

### Idea behind the proof

The idea behind the proof is that it can never happen that there are two sets of *2f + 1* Prevote or Precommit messages in the same round *r* for different values. If that would be the case, we'll have at least *f + 1* processes that sent both the messages, which would mean *f + 1* are faulty. But at most *f* processes are faulty, so this is impossible.

> Moreover, at most one value can be locked in a round and if a correct process decided value *v* in round *r*, *v* will be locked for all the next rounds after *r* on that height and correct processes will not send Prevote/Precommit message for values different than *v*. Therefore, it's clear that *v* will be the only value that could be decided from that moment onwards.

Reviewer: Not true that correct processes will not send PREVOTE for V'. However, at most 2f processes could do that, hence no quorum of them which implies that "nothing bad" will not happen.
Revise this please.

Author: You're right, fixed.

### Proof

Let's assume that a correct process p decides value v in round r of height h. We want to prove that any other correct process p' in some round r' >= r of height h decides v' such that v' = v.

We have two cases:

- if r' = r: 

    p' has decided value v' in round r, so it has received at least 2f + 1 Precommit messages for value v' in round r. 
    p has decided value v in the same round r, so it has received at least 2f + 1 Precommit messages for value v in round r. 
    As it has been shown previously, any two sets of 2f + 1 messages intersect in at least one correct process. Since a correct process only sends a single Precommit message, it must be that v = v'.  

- if r ' > r:
        

>     p has decided value v in the same round r, so it has received at least 2f + 1 Precommit messages for value v in round r.

Reviewer: I think this proof can be written simpler. I think it is sufficient to just mention something like: "If at least f + 1 correct processes lock value V in round R, they only send PREVOTE for V or nil in subsequent rounds" (Lemma 2 from the Tendermint paper).
But, I am ok with this also.

Author: You're right, this can be made much simpler but I specifically wanted to show one step at a time during the proof in order to make it clear for everyone who reads. I changed few things but left the same structure since that should be fine.

    Since the number of faulty processes is at most f, at least f+1 correct processes have locked value v by round r and, by algorithm rules, they will send Prevote messages only for value v in all the next rounds of height h.
    
    p' has decided value v' in round r' > r, so it has received at least 2f + 1 Precommit messages for value v' in round r' > r. 
    Since the number of faulty processes is at most f, at least f+1 correct processes have locked value v' by round r' > r and these processes must have received at least 2f + 1 Prevote messages for value v' by round r'.
    
    From the fact that the intersection of 2f + 1 processes has at least one correct process, at least one correct process that locked value v in round r also sent a Prevote message for value v' in a later round r' > r. 
    Since this is impossible, it can only be that v = v'.   

Since these are the two only possible cases, the above reasoning proves that the agreement property is satisfied.

> In conclusion, when more than 1/3 of processes are faulty, a fork can happen and the agreement property of the consensus algorithm could be violated. Otherwise, the agreement property is always satisfied.

Reviewer: I would avoid using "fork" since we did not define that. I would simply use "violation of agreement" or "disagreement".

Author: Fixed.

# Tendermint protocol overview

We are going to present a very short overview of the [Tendermint](https://github.com/tendermint) consensus algorithm and the main aspects that are necessary in order to understand the fork accountability algorithm. 
Please note that this is not an exhaustive and formal description, we invite the reader to check out the [Tendermint documentation](https://docs.tendermint.com/master/) and the [official paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.04938) about the consensus algorithm.   

## Consensus algorithm

Tendermint is a partially synchronous BFT consensus protocol. The protocol requires a fixed set of validators that attempt to come to consensus on one value or, more precisely, on a block (a block is a list of transactions) using gossip-based communication. The consensus algorithm proceeds in rounds: in each round there is a validator that proposes a value (proposer) and all the validators then vote during the round on whether to accept the proposed value or move on to the next round (proposers are chosen according to their voting power).

> As most of the consensus algorithms, the Tendermint consensus algorithm assumes a correct majority of processes: less than one third of processes are faulty (*f*), therefore the total number of processes *n* is strictly greater than *3f* (*n > 3f*). For simplicity, we can asssume that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As many other BFT consensus solutions, the Tendermint algorithm assumes a correct majority of processes: less than one third of processes are faulty (*f*), therefore the total number of processes *n* is strictly greater than *3f* (*n > 3f*). For simplicity, we can asssume that:
```

Author: Fixed

 
    n = 3f + 1

During a round, processes can exchange different messages and we can summarize the execution in two voting steps: Prevote and Precommit steps. A vote can be for a particular value or for a null value.

A correct process decides on a value *v* in a round *r* upon receiving a proposal and *2f + 1* quorum of Precommit messages for *v* in a round *r*. 
A correct process sends a Precommit message for a value *v* in a round *r* upon receiving a proposal and *2f + 1* quorum of Prevote messages for *v* in a round *r*.

> Validators wait some time before sending a Prevote with a null value if they do not receive a valid proposal after a certain time and they send a Precommit message with a null value if they do not receive *2f + 1* Prevote messages for a value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Validators wait some time before sending a Prevote with a null value if they do not receive a valid proposal after a certain time and they send a Precommit message with a null value if they do not receive *2f + 1* matching Prevote messages for a value.
```

Author: Fixed

> If a correct process receives more than 2/3 Precommit messages for a null value in the same round, it moves to the next round.

Reviewer 2: Hmm does this appear in the [algorithm](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1807.04938.pdf)? I do not recall this detail.

Author: It doesn't appear explicitly in the algorithm but I thought it was a direct consequence from the fact that, if a process p received 2f + 1 prevotes for nil, a precommit for nil is sent. I changed to make more clear what I wanted to say.

After a decision has been made, processes continue to agree on other values on another height (consensus instance) and they repeat the process described above in order to agree on different transactions.

In order to ensure that processes will eventually come to a decision, there are some constraints that are applied. These rules are used to prevent any malicious attempt to cause more than one block to be committed at a given height. 
When a validator *p* sends a Precommit for a value *v* at round *r*, we say the *p* is *locked* on *v*. Validators can propose and send Prevote messages for a value they have locked and they can only change the locked value if they receive a more recent proposal with a quorum of Prevote messages. 

> These conditions ensure both the safety and liveness properties of the consensus algorithm because a validator cannot send a Precommit message without sufficient evidence and cannot send a Precommit message for a different value at the same time.

Reviewer 2: "Evidence" = "justification" in our terminology?

```suggestion
These conditions ensure both the safety and liveness properties of the consensus algorithm because a validator cannot send a Precommit message without sufficient evidence (i.e., justification) and cannot send a Precommit message for a different value in the same round.
```

Author: Yes. I changed to justification just to make it uniform across the documentation for better understanding.

> Tendermint is notable for its simplicity and performance and is currently one of the best consensus algorithm used in production.

Reviewer 2: To be more accurate, we can replace "best" by saying it is one of the most mature and widely used implementations of BFT consensus.

Author: Fixed

## Properties of consensus 

> The Tendermint consensus algorithm guarantees the following properties:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Tendermint consensus algorithm guarantees the following properties, with respect to a consensus instance:
```

Author: Fixed

- **Agreement**: No two correct processes decide on different values

- **Validity**: A value decided is a valid value, with respect to the specifications of validity of a message

- **Termination**: All correct processes eventually decide

- **Integrity**: No correct process decides more than once in a single height 

We limit the discussion to the agreement property only because its proof can be useful to better understand the fork accountability problem. 
We invite interested readers to read the official paper for a more formal, complete and rigorous proof of all the properties listed above.

## Agreement property

In this section we will give a simple proof of the agreement property for the Tendermint algorithm and show why the correct majority assumption we gave before (*n > 3f*, or simply *n = 3f + 1*) is important for ensuring this property.

> The key idea behind the proof of the agreement property is that any two sets of *2f + 1* processes have at least one correct process in common with respect to the Tendermint context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key idea behind the proof of the agreement property is that any two sets of *2f + 1* processes have at least one correct process in common.
```

Author: Fixed
